Documented shuffle sharding (#3236)
cortexproject/cortex: docs/guides/shuffle-sharding.md

---
title: "Shuffle Sharding"
linkTitle: "Shuffle Sharding"
weight: 5
slug: shuffle-sharding
---

Cortex leverages on sharding techniques to horizontally scale both single and multi-tenant clusters beyond the capacity of a single node.

## Background

> The **default sharding strategy** employed by Cortex distributes the workload across the entire pool of instances running a given service (eg. ingesters). For example, on the write path each tenant series are sharded across all ingesters, regardless how many active series the tenant has or how many different tenants are in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **default sharding strategy** employed by Cortex distributes the workload across the entire pool of instances running a given service (eg. ingesters). For example, on the write path each tenant's series are sharded across all ingesters, regardless how many active series the tenant has or how many different tenants are in the cluster.
```

The default strategy allows to have a fair balance on the resources consumed by each instance (ie. CPU and memory) and to maximise these resources across the cluster.

However, in a **multi-tenant** cluster this approach also introduces some **downsides**:

1. An outage affects all tenants

> 1. A mishaving tenant (eg. causing out of memory) could affect all other tenants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A misbehaving tenant (eg. causing out of memory) could affect all other tenants
```

The goal of **shuffle sharding** is to provide an alternative sharding strategy to reduce the blast radius of an outage and better isolate tenants.

## What is shuffle sharding

> Shuffle sharding is a technique used to isolate different tenants workload and to give each tenant a single-tenant experience even if they're running in a shared cluster. This technique has been publicly shared and clearly explained by AWS in their [builders' library](https://aws.amazon.com/builders-library/workload-isolation-using-shuffle-sharding/) and a reference implementation has been shown in the [Route53 Infima library](https://github.com/awslabs/route53-infima/blob/master/src/main/java/com/amazonaws/services/route53/infima/SimpleSignatureShuffleSharder.java).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shuffle sharding is a technique used to isolate different tenant's workloads and to give each tenant a single-tenant experience even if they're running in a shared cluster. This technique has been publicly shared and clearly explained by AWS in their [builders' library](https://aws.amazon.com/builders-library/workload-isolation-using-shuffle-sharding/) and a reference implementation has been shown in the [Route53 Infima library](https://github.com/awslabs/route53-infima/blob/master/src/main/java/com/amazonaws/services/route53/infima/SimpleSignatureShuffleSharder.java).
```

The idea is to assign each tenant a shard composed by a subset of the Cortex service instances, aiming to minimize the overlapping instances between two different tenants. Shuffle sharding brings the following **benefits** over the default sharding strategy:

- An outage on some Cortex cluster instances/nodes will only affect a subset of tenants.

> - A misbehaving tenant will affect only its shard instances. Due to the low overlapping of instances between different tenants, it's probabilistically likely any other tenant will run on different instances or only a subset of instances will match the affected ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A misbehaving tenant will affect only its shard instances. Due to the low overlapping of instances between different tenants, it's statistically quite likely that any other tenant will run on different instances or only a subset of instances will match the affected ones.
```

> - A misbehaving tenant will affect only its shard instances. Due to the low overlapping of instances between different tenants, it's statistically quite likely that any other tenant will run on different instances or only a subset of instances will match the affected ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A misbehaving tenant will affect only its shard instances. Due to the low overlap of instances between different tenants, it's statistically quite likely that any other tenant will run on different instances or only a subset of instances will match the affected ones.
```

### Low overlapping instances probability

For example, given a Cortex cluster running **50 ingesters** and assigning **each tenant 4** out of 50 ingesters, shuffling instances between each tenant, we get **230K possible combinations**.

Randomly picking two different tenants we have the:

> - 71% of chances they will not share any instance
> - 26% of chances they will share only 1 instance
> - 2.7% of chances they will share 2 instances
> - 0.08% of chances they will share 3 instances
> - Only the 0.0004% of chances their instances will fully overlap

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- 71% chance that they will not share any instance
- 26% chance that they will share only 1 instance
- 2.7% chance that they will share 2 instances
- 0.08% chance that they will share 3 instances
- Only the 0.0004% chance that their instances will fully overlap
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- 71% chance that they will not share any instance
- 26% chance that they will share only 1 instance
- 2.7% chance that they will share 2 instances
- 0.08% chance that they will share 3 instances
- Only a 0.0004% chance that their instances will fully overlap
```

![Shuffle sharding probability](/images/guides/shuffle-sharding-probability.png)
<!-- Chart source at https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1FXbiWTXi6bdERtamH-IfmpgFq1fNL4GP_KX_yJvbRi4/edit -->

## Cortex shuffle sharding

Cortex currently supports shuffle sharding in the following services:

- [Ingesters](#ingesters-shuffle-sharding)
- [Query-frontend](#query-frontend-shuffle-sharding)
- [Store-gateway](#store-gateway-shuffle-sharding)

> Shuffle sharding is **disabled by default** and need to be explicitly enabled in the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shuffle sharding is **disabled by default** and needs to be explicitly enabled in the configuration.
```

### Guaranteed properties

The Cortex shuffle sharding implementation guarantees the following properties:

- **Stability**<br />

>   Given a consistent state of the hash ring, the shuffle sharding algorithm always select the same instances for a given tenant, even across different machines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Given a consistent state of the hash ring, the shuffle sharding algorithm always selects the same instances for a given tenant, even across different machines.
```

- **Consistency**<br />
  Adding or removing 1 instance from the hash ring leads to only 1 instance changed at most, in each tenant's shard.
- **Shuffling**<br />

>   Probabilistically and for a large enough cluster, it ensures every tenant gets a different set of instances, with a reduced number of overlapping instances between two tenants to improve failure isolation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Probabilistically and for a large enough cluster, it ensures that every tenant gets a different set of instances, with a reduced number of overlapping instances between two tenants to improve failure isolation.
```

- **Zone-awareness**<br />

>   When [zone-aware replication](./zone-replication.md) is enabled, the subset of instances selected for each tenant contains a balanced number of instances for each availability zone.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that zone-aware shuffle shard *will* lead to unbalanced distribution of workload between zones, if they have widely different set of instances?

Author: It's not just with shuffle sharding enabled. The same happens with shuffle sharding disabled, because with the replication factor is > 1 we'll pick 1 instance per zone. I would document it in the zone-awareness doc (in a separate PR, to unlock this PR).

### Ingesters shuffle sharding

> The Cortex distributor, by default, spreads the received series across all running ingesters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default the Cortex distributor spreads the received series across all running ingesters.
```

When shuffle sharding is **enabled** via `-distributor.sharding-strategy=shuffle-sharding` (or its respective YAML config option), the distributor spreads each tenant series across `-distributor.ingestion-tenant-shard-size` number of ingesters.

_The shard size can be overridden on a per-tenant basis in the limits overrides configuration._

### Query-frontend shuffle sharding

> The Cortex query-frontend, by default, executes the received queries across all running queriers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default all Cortex queriers can execute received queries for given tenant.
```

> When shuffle sharding is **enabled** setting `-frontend.max-queriers-per-user` (or its respective YAML config option) to a value higher than 0 and lower than the available queriers, the query-frontend will execute each tenant queries across a subset of queriers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When shuffle sharding is **enabled** by setting `-frontend.max-queriers-per-user` (or its respective YAML config option) to a value higher than 0 and lower than the available queriers, the query-frontend will execute each tenant's queries across a subset of queriers.
```

> When shuffle sharding is **enabled** by setting `-frontend.max-queriers-per-user` (or its respective YAML config option) to a value higher than 0 and lower than the available queriers, the query-frontend will execute each tenant's queries across a subset of queriers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When shuffle sharding is **enabled** by setting `-frontend.max-queriers-per-user` (or its respective YAML config option) to a value higher than 0 and lower than the number of available queriers, only specified number of queriers will execute queries for single tenant. Note that this distribution happens in query-frontend. When not using query-frontend, this option is not available.
```

_The maximum number of queriers can be overridden on a per-tenant basis in the limits overrides configuration._

### Store-gateway shuffle sharding

> The Cortex store-gateway -- used by the [blocks storage](../blocks-storage/_index.md) -- by default spreads each tenant blocks across all running store-gateways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cortex store-gateway -- used by the [blocks storage](../blocks-storage/_index.md) -- by default spreads each tenant's blocks across all running store-gateways.
```
